[Music]
all being on swimmingly well you've had
this three or four-day journey up to
South Col and suddenly you know the wind
is taking out these sails we filled it
for on actually and we started climbing
up and then suddenly we stopped we're
looking around to see what's going on
somebody had just kind of run out of
energy and was just stopped and then
they just stopped it means everybody
behind it was like being on the m25 so
my name's Tim Mills Dale um a
bed-and-breakfast over here in Kazakh
and I'm also an expedition leader
primarily on a Madeleine but also on
Everest my first summit was with a bunch
of friends 2005 north side small group
really experienced fellow climbers and
that was a hoot and that was my first
time on the mountain I haven't really
thought about climbing the mountain
until I heard about them going on their
expedition I didn't realize that I would
be going back until an opportunity arose
for me to gather a group of private ones
and that then sowed the seed for wanting
to go back in 13 14 15 cetera in total
six summits one on the north 500 myself
it's an immense expedition just one of
the best places to be in the world
you're walking in the footsteps of the
greatest Mountaineers in the world and
it's appreciating that I think that is
really important
[Music]
my name is Joe Bradshaw I am 48 and I'm
an outdoor instructor and expedition
leader it's been told a lot earlier on
in my life that I wasn't capable of
doing stuff you know I never climbed
then I didn't even want to climb Snowden
once sort of before I hit my late
thirties and I packed a lot in since
then and made sure that I've had the
right guidance and being with the right
people with the right experience and it
was really the beginning of 2014 where I
made the decision to go for it in 2015
it's got an allure to different people
for different reasons I think some
people see it as a culmination of their
20 25 30 years of experience and putting
all those skills to the test there's
other people who they see the program on
telly they read the book they read an
article in the National Geographic and
they are inspired now again that might
lead to a 15 year journey but nowadays I
think some people are seeing the article
seeing the program I'm trying to do in 9
10 11 months and they throw themselves
in at the deep end that in itself is a
recipe for disaster
[Music]
so the keys I mean that there have been
queues before I have been stood in that
queue 2016 I mean we thought we were
setting off in reasonable time and
before you know it there's this line you
feel a bit for all and actually you just
suddenly you know the wind is
technically sails it's all been going
swimmingly well you've had this three or
four-day journey up to South Col it's
all getting exciting we're gonna be
opening those Christmas presents soon
and yeah you arrived in to you know you
didn't have to deal with that situation
every step I take every step I move my
toes just here trying to figure out that
circulation every time I feel my fingers
getting a little bit chilly I'll pull my
fingers out and maybe warm them up I'm
thinking about every so often the
opportunity to have a jelly baby or the
fruity sweets do apply so jelly babies
were great I remember putting my
headphones in my earphones in one ear
and black-eyed peas came on tonight's
gonna be a good night so I was like
right here we go and we started climbing
up and then suddenly we stopped looking
around see what was going on and then
somebody had just kind of run out of
energy and was just stopped and when
they just stopped it means everybody
behind them it's like being on the m25
the person that's at the front of this
particular queue and then they'll be a
gap and it's another queue and they're
like and you know the person at the
front is holding up all these people if
they when they rested if they just
stepped over the rope because you all
you won't tend to be on the same side of
the rope you know that's how the the
terrain is lying and that's how you
would naturally be and if they just
stepped over the rope and people could
just jumar up along thank you very much
past them keep on going
there you get a rest they get past these
people aren't going to hold up that
person and then eventually when they're
rested over there but they don't because
they don't have that awareness because
they probably haven't been there before
the foam you're not been in that
situation before so they just go up the
Rope a few steps and
top when you jumar up the color steps in
the new weights and then you want to
color steps and then you wait three
hours later you wake up and you go I've
got cold hands or I'm really thirsty or
milk students went out I that shouldn't
happen
I could either stand there going are
these people are ruining my chance or I
could go okay this is how it is and I
need to with Georgie and Rolfe work out
a strategy of keeping going safely and
not getting caught up in that scenario
here's an example of the kind of people
that sometimes you find yourself queuing
behind and it looks innocuous enough
initially but we've got components on
the wrong feet and clearly that's a
safety issue particularly with metal toe
belt components we've got quick draws on
a harness and you just don't need quick
draws on Everest it's just unnecessary
weight and clutter we've got a helmet on
a rucksack instead of on a head and it's
really steep terrain here and we've got
a rucksack that's open and the contents
are spilling out and he's despite some
losses some cream amongst other items
and you know I'm sorry but people like
that that person is a liability to
themselves and therefore a liability to
everyone around them but it's having
that experience and knowing when to turn
around even if you can see the summit
you have you know if you don't have
enough oxygen you are gonna be in a
whole load of trouble if it runs out and
that's the stuff that's going to keep
your life and your fingers and toes
attached and people do people do get
into a queue and go you know what too
late too slow I'm too cold in the
turnaround but I think a lot of people
would find it very difficult having come
that far and paid that much money and
told all those people our social media
what they're doing I think there's a lot
of people who find it very difficult to
to make that decision so people aren't
necessarily dying from being in a queue
they're dying maybe because of the fact
that they've run out of oxygen but the
reason why the ran out of oxygen is
because they were in the queue and they
haven't got access to spare oxygen
because they're with the wrong team I
[Music]
think it it could be accessible for
everybody if they have the right skills
to go and do it
what I find disappointing is when people
want to go and climb Everest to bag it
and drag it mountaineering shouldn't be
about that it should be about the
challenge and the skills and the beauty
of where you are and being part of a
close-knit small team for me is really
important what is the solution do you do
you limit the numbers well who's to tell
Nepal how to run their business you know
we can't even sort out our own politics
and it's used at home let alone telling
the pool how to manage their ministries
for ISM so you know limiting the numbers
would be I think very difficult but I
think that the blame can't be laid in
one place it can't be late just within
the poorly government there has to be a
responsibility by the expedition
companies whether they're Western based
or Nepali based about who they take on
to the mountain and if the clients
aren't up to the job then they shouldn't
be allowed to go higher because they're
putting everybody's lives at risk
I mean I've explained is gonna get
kicking every spring it's gonna be in
the news I think it gets more bad press
than it deserves I don't think people
fully understand a trust